README.md, before:

# Jupyterhub SAML Auth

[![image](https://badge.fury.io/py/jupyterhub-saml-auth.svg)](https://pypi.org/project/jupyterhub-saml-auth/)

Authenticate your Jupyterhub users using SAML. This authenticator uses OneLogin's [python3-saml](https://github.com/onelogin/python3-saml) package as a backend API for handling SAML authentication.


## Installation

``` bash
pip install jupyterhub-saml-auth
```

## Configuration

See the `jupyterhub_config.py` example configuration below for how to integrate this package with jupyterhub. For all configuration settings, see `authenticator.py`.

```python
def extract_username(acs_handler, attributes):
    email = attributes['email'][0]
    username = email.split('@')[0]
    return username

# The configuration path is for OneLogin's python3-saml package. This directory is where
# settings.json & advanced_settings.json go. See https://github.com/onelogin/python3-saml
# for more info about this
c.SAMLAuthenticator.saml_settings_path = '/app/etc'

# The cookies that your IdP uses for maintaining a login session. These will be cleared
# once the user hits 'logout'
c.SAMLAuthenticator.session_cookie_names = {'PHPSESSIDIDP', 'SimpleSAMLAuthTokenIdp'}

# Sessions can be cached. See Cache section below for more info
c.SAMLAuthenticator.cache_spec = {
    'type': 'disabled',
    'client': None,
    'client_kwargs': None
}

# redirect to idp single logout 
c.SAMLAuthenticator.idp_logout = True

# pass extra properties to the logout handler upon single logout
# see https://github.com/onelogin/python3-saml/blob/ba572e24fd3028c0e38c8f9dcd02af46ddcc0870/src/onelogin 
# for all available properties 
c.SAMLAuthenticator.logout_kwargs = {}

# Function that extracts the username from the SAML attributes.
c.SAMLAuthenticator.extract_username = extract_username

# register the SAML authenticator with jupyterhub
c.JupyterHub.authenticator_class = 'jupyterhub_saml_auth.SAMLAuthenticator'
```

### Specify the Cache

Cache is specified by `c.SAMLAuthenticator.cache_spec` and has 3 fields: `type`, `client`, and `client_kwargs`.

`type` currently has three types: `disabled`, `in-memory`, and `redis`.

specifying `client` and `client_kwargs` is not required for `disabled` and `in-memory` types

Example of how to specify `redis` below

```python
# in jupyterhub_config.py
import redis
import os

redis_client = redis.Redis
# arguments to pass to client upon creation
redis_kwargs = {
    'host': os.getenv('REDIS_HOST'),
    'port': os.getenv('REDIS_PORT')
}

c.SAMLAuthenticator.cache_spec = {
    'type': redis,
    'client': redis_client,
    'client_kwargs': redis_kwargs
}
```

### Environment variables

- `SAML_HTTPS_OVERRIDE`: setting this will override the automatic detection of `http` or `https` to `/hub/acs` route and will set it to only `https`.

### Redis Configuration in Docker Compose

Create a `.env` file with the following environment variables:

```bash
REDIS_HOST
REDIS_PORT
REDIS_PASSWORD
```

## Development

### Prerequisite software

- docker
- docker compose
- python3
- Firefox or Chrome

### Create a development environment

```bash
# at project root
python3 -m venv .
source bin/activate
pip install -r requirements.txt

# OPTIONAL, install package if developing source code
pip install -e .
pytest test/unit # run the unit tests

```

#### Test the authentication process

The acceptance test starts the application as a Docker container. Start the containers with `docker compose up -d` prior to running the acceptance test with the command `pytest test/test_acceptance.py`. See `conftest.py` for a list of command line switches/flags to run the acceptance tests.

### Kill your docker environment

To kill the docker containers, run the command `docker compose down` at the project root.

## References

https://github.com/onelogin/python3-saml

https://goteleport.com/blog/how-saml-authentication-works/

https://medium.com/@BoweiHan/elijd-single-sign-on-saml-and-single-logout-624efd5a224

https://medium.com/disney-streaming/setup-a-single-sign-on-saml-test-environment-with-docker-and-nodejs-c53fc1a984c9

Commit message:

Add additional info regarding /hub/acs
https://github.com/ucsd-ets/jupyterhub-saml-auth/issues/8

README.md, after:

# Jupyterhub SAML Auth

[![image](https://badge.fury.io/py/jupyterhub-saml-auth.svg)](https://pypi.org/project/jupyterhub-saml-auth/)

Authenticate your Jupyterhub users using SAML. This authenticator uses OneLogin's [python3-saml](https://github.com/onelogin/python3-saml) package as a backend API for handling SAML authentication.


## Installation

``` bash
pip install jupyterhub-saml-auth
```

## Configuration

See the `jupyterhub_config.py` example configuration below for how to integrate this package with jupyterhub. For all configuration settings, see `authenticator.py`.

```python
def extract_username(acs_handler, attributes):
    email = attributes['email'][0]
    username = email.split('@')[0]
    return username

# The configuration path is for OneLogin's python3-saml package. This directory is where
# settings.json & advanced_settings.json go. See https://github.com/onelogin/python3-saml
# for more info about this
c.SAMLAuthenticator.saml_settings_path = '/app/etc'

# The cookies that your IdP uses for maintaining a login session. These will be cleared
# once the user hits 'logout'
c.SAMLAuthenticator.session_cookie_names = {'PHPSESSIDIDP', 'SimpleSAMLAuthTokenIdp'}

# Sessions can be cached. See Cache section below for more info
c.SAMLAuthenticator.cache_spec = {
    'type': 'disabled',
    'client': None,
    'client_kwargs': None
}

# redirect to idp single logout 
c.SAMLAuthenticator.idp_logout = True

# pass extra properties to the logout handler upon single logout
# see https://github.com/onelogin/python3-saml/blob/ba572e24fd3028c0e38c8f9dcd02af46ddcc0870/src/onelogin 
# for all available properties 
c.SAMLAuthenticator.logout_kwargs = {}

# Function that extracts the username from the SAML attributes.
c.SAMLAuthenticator.extract_username = extract_username

# register the SAML authenticator with jupyterhub
c.JupyterHub.authenticator_class = 'jupyterhub_saml_auth.SAMLAuthenticator'
```

### Specify the Cache

Cache is specified by `c.SAMLAuthenticator.cache_spec` and has 3 fields: `type`, `client`, and `client_kwargs`.

`type` currently has three types: `disabled`, `in-memory`, and `redis`.

specifying `client` and `client_kwargs` is not required for `disabled` and `in-memory` types

Example of how to specify `redis` below

```python
# in jupyterhub_config.py
import redis
import os

redis_client = redis.Redis
# arguments to pass to client upon creation
redis_kwargs = {
    'host': os.getenv('REDIS_HOST'),
    'port': os.getenv('REDIS_PORT')
}

c.SAMLAuthenticator.cache_spec = {
    'type': redis,
    'client': redis_client,
    'client_kwargs': redis_kwargs
}
```

### Environment variables
- `SAML_HTTPS_OVERRIDE`: setting this will override the automatic detection of `http` or `https` to `/hub/acs` route and will set it to only `https`.
  - _This may not function as expected unless you modify `/etc/settings.json`. See `assertionConsumerService` below for more details._

### /etc/settings.json
- `assertionConsumerService`: changing this is also necessary to override automatic detection of `http` or `https` to `/hub/acs`.
  - Append `/hub/acs/` to the end of `url` _instead_ of `/?acs` or `/hub/saml_login`. Otherwise, you may receive a `405 Method not Allowed` error w/a POST.
  - _(See [this issue](https://github.com/ucsd-ets/jupyterhub-saml-auth/issues/8) for more information.)_

### Redis Configuration in Docker Compose

Create a `.env` file with the following environment variables:

```bash
REDIS_HOST
REDIS_PORT
REDIS_PASSWORD
```

## Development

### Prerequisite software

- docker
- docker compose
- python3
- Firefox or Chrome

### Create a development environment

```bash
# at project root
python3 -m venv .
source bin/activate
pip install -r requirements.txt

# OPTIONAL, install package if developing source code
pip install -e .
pytest test/unit # run the unit tests

```

#### Test the authentication process

The acceptance test starts the application as a Docker container. Start the containers with `docker compose up -d` prior to running the acceptance test with the command `pytest test/test_acceptance.py`. See `conftest.py` for a list of command line switches/flags to run the acceptance tests.

### Kill your docker environment

To kill the docker containers, run the command `docker compose down` at the project root.

## References

https://github.com/onelogin/python3-saml

https://goteleport.com/blog/how-saml-authentication-works/

https://medium.com/@BoweiHan/elijd-single-sign-on-saml-and-single-logout-624efd5a224

https://medium.com/disney-streaming/setup-a-single-sign-on-saml-test-environment-with-docker-and-nodejs-c53fc1a984c9
